book/course/spack/environments.md, before:

# Environments

Environments in Spack feel a whole lot like environments in Conda; they allow
you to bundle up a number of different pieces of software into a single entity,
making a single coherent collection.

## Creating an environment

Here's a minimal workflow for creating an environment:

- Create a blank environment

  ```bash
  spack env create myenv
  ```

- Add a list of software to it

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv add bash@5 python py-numpy py-scipy py-matplotlib
  ```

- Tweak the config if required

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv config edit
  ```

 I'm changing `unify` to `true` for this install, but please review the references for more information on options.

- Validate the installation

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv concretize
  ```

 [Concretizing](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html#spec-concretization)
the spec resolves all the dependecies and shows you what Spack believes is
required to satisfy you requirements.

- Build and install the software

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv install
  ```

Note this follows the normal behaviour of Spack, reusing previously built
software, and external software you've told it to use.

## Using an environment

Again, this feels very familiar to people used to Conda; you have to activate
an environment before using it:

```bash
spack env activate myenv
```

Once activated, you can confirm that it's really live:

```bash
$ which bash
~/spack/var/spack/environments/myenv/.spack-env/view/bin/bash
$ bash --version
wGNU bash, version 5.1.8(1)-release (x86_64-pc-linux-gnu)
Copyright (C) 2020 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

This is free software; you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
```

## References

[Using Spack to Replace Homebrew/Conda](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/replace_conda_homebrew.html)
[Environments](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html)

Commit message:

Update for 2023 (#48)
Lots of changes for 2023, mostly to make things work with a new version of Spack, but also for now to detach from using tcl environment-modules, to just using spack load.

* Update to match current versions
* pre-commit fix
* Fix container section to actually work

Changes to the spack.yaml meant it didn't build right.  Also, the inner MPI
doesn't match the outer MPI, so running across multiple nodes won't work with
that example.  I've tidied it so it at least works on a single node.

book/course/spack/environments.md, after:

# Environments

Environments in Spack feel a whole lot like environments in Conda; they allow
you to bundle up a number of different pieces of software into a single entity,
making a single coherent collection.

## Creating an environment

Here's a minimal workflow for creating an environment:

- Create a blank environment

  ```bash
  spack env create myenv
  ```

- Add a list of software to it

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv add bash@5 python py-numpy py-scipy py-matplotlib openssl@1.1.1t
  ```

- Tweak the config if required

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv config edit
  ```

  Please review the references for more information on options here, but nothing
  needs changing this time.

- Validate the installation

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv concretize
  ```

  [Concretizing](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html#spec-concretization)
  the spec resolves all the dependecies and shows you what Spack believes is
  required to satisfy you requirements.

- Build and install the software

  ```bash
  spack -e myenv install
  ```

Note this follows the normal behaviour of Spack, reusing previously built
software, and external software you've told it to use.

## Using an environment

Again, this feels very familiar to people used to Conda; you have to activate
an environment before using it:

```bash
spack env activate myenv
```

Once activated, you can confirm that it's really live:

```bash
$ which bash
/tmp/me/spack/var/spack/environments/myenv/.spack-env/view/bin/bash
$ bash --version
GNU bash, version 5.2.15(1)-release (x86_64-pc-linux-gnu)
Copyright (C) 2022 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
License GPLv3+: GNU GPL version 3 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

This is free software; you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.
```

### Deactivating an environment

You can leave an environment using:

```bash
spack env deactivate
```

## References

[Using Spack to Replace Homebrew/Conda](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/replace_conda_homebrew.html)
[Environments](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/environments.html)
