book/course/spack/installing.md, before:

# Installing Spack

Installing Spack, at least in a basic form that is at least usable, is very
straightforward.  It's literally a single command:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spack/spack
```

At its simplest, that's all you need to do.  For this course we're going to
deliberately pick a specific stable version:

```bash
$ cd spack
$ git checkout releases/v0.19
$ cd ..
```

Now, there's more you can to do to configure it, which we'll talk
about later, but as far as the initial installation, that's it.  But let's
deliberately do a little bit more in this installation section, just so we
convince ourselves that we've really done it.  We'll go over it in more detail
in the next section.

## Enabling Spack

So to use it, you need to load the profile script that enables Spack.  Having
just downloaded it as above, you can do:

```bash
$ module add anaconda
$ . spack/share/spack/setup-env.sh
```

Spack is now alive in your terminal, and you can query available packages, or
look at one to see what options you have for building it.  We can now have a
look at what packages are available to install:

```bash
$ spack list
3dtk
3proxy
7zip
abacus
abduco
abi-compliance-checker
abi-dumper
abinit
abseil-cpp
abyss
...
```

Now that's quite a list (6548 different pieces of software at the time of
writing).

So let's move on to look at the next section, where we install one to show how
a simple package install works.

## Exercises

In future sections there will be exercises for you to try, along with
solutions.  For now, please just install and enable Spack on your own system.

## References

- [Basic Installation Tutorial](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial_basics.html#basic-installation-tutorial)

Commit message:

Update for 2023 (#48)
Lots of changes for 2023, mostly to make things work with a new version of Spack, but also for now to detach from using tcl environment-modules, to just using spack load.

* Update to match current versions
* pre-commit fix
* Fix container section to actually work

Changes to the spack.yaml meant it didn't build right.  Also, the inner MPI
doesn't match the outer MPI, so running across multiple nodes won't work with
that example.  I've tidied it so it at least works on a single node.

book/course/spack/installing.md, after:

# Installing Spack

Installing Spack, at least in a basic form that is at least usable, is very
straightforward.  It's literally a single command:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spack/spack
```

At its simplest, that's all you need to do.  For this course we're going to
deliberately pick a specific stable version:

```bash
$ cd spack
$ git checkout v0.20.1
$ cd ..
```

Now, there's more you can to do to configure it, which we'll talk
about later, but as far as the initial installation, that's it.  But let's
deliberately do a little bit more in this installation section, just so we
convince ourselves that we've really done it.  We'll go over it in more detail
in the next section.

## Enabling Spack

So to use it, you need to load the profile script that enables Spack.  Having
just downloaded it as above, you can do:

```bash
$ module add anaconda
$ . spack/share/spack/setup-env.sh
```

Here we're loading anaconda as Spack needs Python 3.

Spack is now alive in your terminal, and you can query available packages, or
look at one to see what options you have for building it.  We can now have a
look at what packages are available to install:

```bash
$ spack list
3dtk
3proxy
7zip
abacus
abduco
abi-compliance-checker
abi-dumper
abinit
abseil-cpp
abyss
...
```

Now that's quite a list (7179 different pieces of software at the time of
writing).

So let's move on to look at the next section, where we install one to show how
a simple package install works.

## Exercises

In future sections there will be exercises for you to try, along with
solutions.  For now, please just install and enable Spack on your own system.

## References

- [Basic Installation Tutorial](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial_basics.html#basic-installation-tutorial)
