book/course/spack/modules.md, before:

# Adjusting how we name modules

In the last section we built a version of pigz, and loaded it:

```bash
$ module add pigz-2.7-gcc-8.5.0-qkx6pxv
$ pigz --version
pigz 2.7
```

Now, it's very definitive what you're loading (pigz version 2.7 built with gcc
8.5.0 with a hash to pin it down further), but it's a bit wordy.  This format
of modules isn't necessarily what you want, and something cleaner is likely
more generally useful.

One option is to simplify this a great deal, hiding a lot of that information,
which might be appealing if you know that information is not important to you.
So if you're using one compiler, you don't really care about the compiler used,
you don't need the hash at the end if you're only dealing with a single variant
(covered [later](advanced.html#variants)), and you'd probably like the modules names
more in line with how they have traditionally been named, with the version
separate from the package name.

There's a single file within the spack directory that defines how spack
generates module files, and we can edit it via:

```bash
spack config edit modules
```

A basic starting point might be the following:

```yaml
modules:
  default:
    tcl:
      hash_length: 0
      projections:
        all:  '{name}/{version}'
```

Here we're saying that we want the default module files that use tcl (the
default) to not have a hash, and to be named according to this name/version
model we're used to on other systems.  Quit and save that file, and we've told
Spack how we'd like these modules to be built in future, but existing modules
would still use the old scheme.  We can tell it to rebuild the modulefiles, and
delete existing files:

```bash
spack module tcl refresh --delete-tree -y
```

Testing this out now we can see all is how we wanted it:

```bash
$ module avail
---------- /home/me/spack/share/spack/modules/linux-rhel8-haswell -----------
pigz/2.7  zlib/1.2.12
```

We now have tidy module files, named in a nice simple fashion, which is
probably enough for most straightforward purposes.

If you want more complicated structures, supporting multiple compilers, MPI
implementations, numerical libraries, this is all possible, and covered in the
link below in the references.  It also supports LMod as well as the more legacy
Tcl system.

## References

- [Module files tutorial](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial_modules.html)

Commit message:

Additional wording around use of hash

book/course/spack/modules.md, after:

# Adjusting how we name modules

In the last section we built a version of pigz, and loaded it:

```bash
$ module add pigz-2.7-gcc-8.5.0-qkx6pxv
$ pigz --version
pigz 2.7
```

Now, it's very definitive what you're loading (pigz version 2.7 built with gcc
8.5.0 with a hash to pin it down further), but it's a bit wordy.  This format
of modules isn't necessarily what you want, and something cleaner is likely
more generally useful.  Don't be bothered by the mangle of characters at the
end (the hash).  This just precisely identifies a given build of software,
which can be useful if you need to distinguish between two slightly different
builds of a given piece of software.  We're going to mostly ignore this in this
course, as we're not looking at such complex installations.

One option is to simplify this a great deal, hiding a lot of that information,
which might be appealing if you know that information is not important to you.
So if you're using one compiler, you don't really care about the compiler used,
you don't need the hash at the end if you're only dealing with a single variant
(covered [later](advanced.html#variants)), and you'd probably like the modules
names more in line with how they have traditionally been named, with the
version separate from the package name.

There's a single file within the spack directory that defines how spack
generates module files, and we can edit it via:

```bash
spack config edit modules
```

A basic starting point might be the following:

```yaml
modules:
  default:
    tcl:
      hash_length: 0
      projections:
        all:  '{name}/{version}'
```

Here we're saying that we want the default module files that use tcl (the
default) to not have a hash, and to be named according to this name/version
model we're used to on other systems.  Quit and save that file, and we've told
Spack how we'd like these modules to be built in future, but existing modules
would still use the old scheme.  We can tell it to rebuild the modulefiles, and
delete existing files:

```bash
spack module tcl refresh --delete-tree -y
```

Testing this out now we can see all is how we wanted it:

```bash
$ module avail
---------- /home/me/spack/share/spack/modules/linux-rhel8-haswell -----------
pigz/2.7  zlib/1.2.12
```

We now have tidy module files, named in a nice simple fashion, which is
probably enough for most straightforward purposes.

If you want more complicated structures, supporting multiple compilers, MPI
implementations, numerical libraries, this is all possible, and covered in the
link below in the references.  It also supports LMod as well as the more legacy
Tcl system.

## References

- [Module files tutorial](https://spack-tutorial.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial_modules.html)
